---
title: dev - 2020/10
date: 2020-10-05T06:03:33.592Z
---
# 2020/10/05
## 🌠 cordova iOS CORS
### [Enabling CORS](https://breautek.com/2020/07/14/enabling-cors/)

With WKWebView, CORS is enabled and enforced. This means that if you make a XHR request, the server must respond in a CORS-compliant way.

In the nutshell, CORS allows you to grant or restrict access to your backend APIs. On every XHR request, an Origin http header is added. The Origin header is always the domain of the executing script.

Starting with cordova-ios@6, where the WKWebView is built into the core, you can specify a custom URL scheme (e.g. app://localhost). In these cases, the Origin will be your chosen URL scheme.

So how do implement the protocol? This depends on your tech stack on your server. But most simply your server should respond to every request with the following response headers:
- Access-Control-Allow-Origin
- Access-Control-Allow-Headers
- Access-Control-Allow-Methods

### [Cordova iOS 6.0.0 Released!](https://cordova.apache.org/announcements/2020/06/01/cordova-ios-release-6.0.0.html)

WKURLSchemeHandler support has been introduced with this release.\
Using a custom scheme to serve your app content through fixes CORS issues that exist because of the strict security policies that WKWebView has applied to the file scheme.\
You can easily configure your Cordova project to use a custom scheme by setting the preference options scheme and hostname in the config.xml file.
```xml
<preference name="scheme" value="app" /> <!-- not changable -->
<preference name="hostname" value="localhost" /> <!-- changable -->
```
It is important to know that with the introduction of WKURLSchemeHandler, iOS 10 support has been dropped.