---
title: CSS
date: 2021-05-20T14:46:57.622Z
---

# Font

## [Optimize WebFont loading and rendering](https://web.dev/optimize-webfont-loading/)

<details>

### The default behavior

1. The browser requests the HTML document.
2. The browser begins parsing the HTML response and constructing the DOM.
3. The browser discovers CSS, JS, and other resources and dispatches requests.
4. The browser constructs the CSSOM after all of the CSS content is received and combines it with the DOM tree to construct the render tree.

   - Font requests are dispatched after the render tree indicates which font variants are needed to render the specified text on the page.

5. The browser performs layout and paints content to the screen.
   - If the font is not yet available, the browser may not render any text pixels.
   - After the font is available, the browser paints the text pixels.

### Customize the text rendering delay

While preloading makes it more likely that a WebFont will be available when a page's content is rendered, it offers no guarantees. You still need to consider how browsers behave when rendering text that uses a font-family which is not yet available.

In the post [Avoid invisible text during font loading](https://web.dev/avoid-invisible-text/) you can see that default browser behavior is not consistent. However, you can tell modern browsers how you want them to behave by using `font-display`.

Similar to the existing font timeout behaviors that some browsers implement, font-display segments the lifetime of a font download into three major periods:

1. The first period is the font block period. During this period, if the font face is not loaded, any element attempting to use it must instead render with an invisible fallback font face. If the font face successfully loads during the block period, the font face is then used normally.
2. The font swap period occurs immediately after the font block period. During this period, if the font face is not loaded, any element attempting to use it must instead render with a fallback font face. If the font face successfully loads during the swap period, the font face is then used normally.
3. The font failure period occurs immediately after the font swap period. If the font face is not yet loaded when this period starts, it's marked as a failed load, causing normal font fallback. Otherwise, the font face is used normally.

Understanding these periods means you can use font-display to decide how your font should render depending on whether or when it was downloaded.

To work with the font-display property, add it to your @font-face rules:

```CSS
@font-face {
  font-family: 'Awesome Font';
  font-style: normal;
  font-weight: 400;
  font-display: auto; /* or block, swap, fallback, optional */
  src: local('Awesome Font'),
    url('/fonts/awesome-l.woff2') format('woff2'), /* will be preloaded */
    url('/fonts/awesome-l.woff') format('woff'),
    url('/fonts/awesome-l.ttf') format('truetype'),
    url('/fonts/awesome-l.eot') format('embedded-opentype');
  unicode-range: U+000-5FF; /* Latin glyphs */
}
```

font-display currently supports the following range of values:

- auto
- block
- swap
- fallback
- optional

### The Font Loading API

Used together, `<link rel="preload">` and the CSS font-display give you a great deal of control over font loading and rendering, without adding in much overhead. But if you need additional customizations, and are willing to incur the overhead introduced by running JavaScript, there is another option.

The [Font Loading API](https://www.w3.org/TR/css-font-loading/) provides a scripting interface to define and manipulate CSS font faces, track their download progress, and override their default lazyload behavior. For example, if you're sure that a particular font variant is required, you can define it and tell the browser to initiate an immediate fetch of the font resource:

```javascript
var font = new FontFace("Awesome Font", "url(/fonts/awesome.woff2)", {
  style: "normal",
  unicodeRange: "U+000-5FF",
  weight: "400",
});

// don't wait for the render tree, initiate an immediate fetch!
font.load().then(function () {
  // apply the font (which may re-render text and cause a page reflow)
  // after the font has finished downloading
  document.fonts.add(font);
  document.body.style.fontFamily = "Awesome Font, serif";

  // OR... by default the content is hidden,
  // and it's rendered after the font is available
  var content = document.getElementById("content");
  content.style.visibility = "visible";

  // OR... apply your own render strategy here...
});
```

</details>

## [5 steps to faster web fonts](https://iainbean.com/posts/2021/5-steps-to-faster-web-fonts/)

Fine-tune your font files and optimise your loading strategy for maximum speed + minimum FOUT

<details>

In [my previous post](https://iainbean.com/posts/2021/system-fonts-dont-have-to-be-ugly/), I wrote about system fonts and their advantages over web fonts. I encouraged a ‘system fonts first’ approach, arguing that, compared to system fonts, web fonts (a) can negatively impact performance, (b) use more data, and (c) increase your site’s energy consumption. But a web without web fonts would be a far less interesting one — maybe by using web fonts a little more responsibly we can get all their benefits, while minimising the disadvantages.

Credit goes to Zach Leatherman, who has written at length about web fonts on his site. All of his articles are worth reading, especially [The Font Loading Checklist](https://www.zachleat.com/web/font-checklist/) and [A Comprehensive Guide to Font Loading Strategies](https://www.zachleat.com/web/comprehensive-webfonts/) (which is indeed very comprehensive), both of which came in very useful while I was putting this post together.

### Use the most modern file formats

Web Open Font Format 2.0 (WOFF2) is, at the time of writing, the smallest and most efficient file format for web fonts. When using @font-face at-rules in your CSS, ensure the WOFF2 font appears before older, less efficient, file formats such as TTF. The browser will use the first font in the list it understands, even if it’s a larger file.

```CSS
@font-face {
  font-family: 'Typefesse';
  src: url('typefesse.woff2') format('woff2'),
    url('typefesse.woff') format('woff');
}
```

Unless you need to support IE8, you don’t need anything other than WOFF2 and WOFF. If you don’t need to support IE11, you only need WOFF2.

If you only have a TTF file (for example, if you’ve downloaded the font from Google Fonts), you’ll need to convert it using a tool like [Online Font Converter](https://onlinefontconverter.com/). If you’re not using a font with a fully open source license, first check whether the licence permits this.

### Use the font-display descriptor

There are two acronyms you’ll see a lot when you start delving into font loading strategies:

1. Flash of Invisible Text (FOIT) is the period of time when text is invisible before the browser has downloaded a web font.
2. Flash of Unstyled Text (FOUT) is the period of time where text is rendered in a fallback font before the browser has downloaded a web font.

If we take our font-face at-rule from before and add a font-display descriptor, we can tell the browser which one we’d prefer.

```CSS
@font-face {
  font-family: 'Typefesse';
  src: url('typefesse.woff2') format('woff2'),
    url('typefesse.woff') format('woff');
  font-display: swap;
}
```

There are five possible values for `font-display`: the first, auto is the browser’s default behaviour (most browsers favour FOIT). Here are the other four:

#### swap

`swap` tells the browser we want it to show text using a fallback font until the web font is loaded (i.e. we’d prefer a FOUT). This is a good base because it lets website visitors start reading your content right away, but be sure to choose a similar fallback (we’ll cover fallbacks in part two of this series) to prevent a big layout shift when the fonts are swapped.

#### block

If we’d rather the browser hides text until the web font is loaded (i.e. we’d rather a FOIT), we can use `font-display: block`. Text won’t remain invisible forever though: if the font doesn’t load within a certain period (usually three seconds), the browser will use the fallback font anyway, swapping in the web font once it has loaded.

If this seems to you like the best option because you think the FOUT looks bad, remember that when text is invisible, your page isn’t useable and your content isn’t readable.

#### fallback

`fallback` is similar to `swap` with two differences:

1. It begins with an incredibly small (~100ms) 'block' period where text is hidden, after which it shows the fallback font.
2. If the web font doesn’t load within a short period (~3s), the fallback font will be used for the rest of the page’s lifetime.

If you’re not fussed whether the user sees your web font the first time they visit your site (chances are they’re not that fussed themselves), `fallback` is a good choice.

#### optional

`optional` is similar to fallback, but it gives the font an extremely short period of time (~100ms) to load, after which it won’t be swapped. It does, however, have an additional feature where it lets the browser decide to abort the font request if the connection is too slow for the font to load.

### Preload your font files

To minimise the FOIT/FOUT period, we want to load our web font files as quickly as possible. Using `<link rel="preload">` in our HTML `<head>`, we can tell the browser to start fetching our fonts earlier. Add the following tag towards the top of your <head> (before any CSS), setting the href attribute to the URL of your font file:

```CSS
<link rel="preload" href="/typefesse.woff2" as="font" type="font/woff2" crossorigin>
```

Browsers are usually smart enough to only download fonts if they’re needed on the current page. Using preload overrides this behaviour, forcing the browser to download a font even if it isn’t used. For this reason, only ever preload a single format of each font (WOFF2 if you have it).

The more fonts you preload, the less benefit you’ll get from this technique, so prioritise those fonts which appear ‘above the fold’ (the first 100vh the user sees without scrolling).

You can read more about preloading in this article by Yoav Weiss: [Preload: What Is It Good For?](https://www.smashingmagazine.com/2016/02/preload-what-is-it-good-for/)

### Subset your font files

By subsetting a font, we can generate a new smaller font file which only includes the glyphs (a glyph is an individual character or symbol) we need. I used the [Font Subsetter](https://everythingfonts.com/subsetter) tool on Everything Fonts to subset the font used for headings on this site, [Space Grotesk Bold](https://fonts.floriankarsten.com/space-grotesk), to only include characters in the ‘Basic Latin’ range. This reduced the filesize of the WOFF2 version from 30kB to just 7kB.

Subsetting is a powerful tool, but it does come with some potential downsides. If you’re building a website that displays user-generated content, people’s names, or place names you should consider characters other than the 26 standard letters, 10 numbers, and handful of symbols common in English writing.

As a minimum, you should think about diacritics: glyphs that appear above or below a character which alter its pronunciation. These are common in languages including French, Spanish, Vietnamese, as well as transliterated (or ‘romanised’) text from alphabets like Greek or Hebrew; they also appear in loanwords (words adopted from another language).

If you subset too aggressively, you could even end up with a mix of fonts in the same word.

> A screenshot of the word 'Papier-mâché' in the font Space Grotesk, but the two letters with diacritics are in a different font.

If I wanted to pivot to writing about crafts, I might need to adjust the subset font file I use for headings. Note how the shapes of the ‘â’ and ‘é’ (with diacritics) don’t match the versions of those letters without diacritics.

Fortunately, you don’t have to manually check every page on your site for different glyphs. [Glyphhanger](https://www.zachleat.com/web/glyphhanger/) is a command line tool, which does two things: firstly, it looks at your webpages and determines the Unicode character ranges used (these ranges correspond to a script or language. e.g. ‘Basic Latin’, ‘Cyrillic’, ‘Thai’); secondly it subsets a font file, outputting a new version containing only the characters in the specified ranges.

It can be a little tricky to get started with Glyphhanger (you’ll need python and pip) — Sara Soueidan’s explains how she got it working here: [How I set up Glyphhanger on macOS for optimizing and converting font files for the Web](https://www.sarasoueidan.com/blog/glyphhanger/).

As with changing file formats, make sure the licence for your font permits subsetting.

### Self-host your fonts

...

If you’re still using Google Fonts purely because of the convenience, take a look at [google-webfonts-helper](https://google-webfonts-helper.herokuapp.com/). This tool lets you build a custom web font bundle from the complete set of Google fonts, define the weights and character sets you need, then gives you a single download containing all the CSS and font files (in the latest formats) you need.

Here are a list of good reasons not to use a hosted service and self-host your fonts instead:

#### Performance

Domain lookups take time; you can use [`preconnect` resource hints](https://web.dev/uses-rel-preconnect/) to mitigate the issue, but there will always be a performance penalty for opening a TCP connection to a new domain. This might be why some of Google’s own sites (including [web.dev](https://web.dev/)) now use self-hosted fonts instead of Google Fonts.

#### Privacy

Paid-for web font services like Adobe Fonts need to detect page views for billing purposes, but they may be collecting more data than is strictly necessary. If you’re given the choice, load your fonts using CSS (`<link rel="stylesheet">`), instead of JavaScript (`<script>`), to minimise the amount of data the third-party is able to collect about your users.

Google Fonts doesn’t appear to collect much on website visitors beyond IP addresses and User Agent strings, but Google aren’t acting completely selflessly by providing the service for free. Each one of the fifty trillion page views using Google Fonts is a data point Google wouldn’t have if the websites chose to use self-hosted fonts instead.

#### Control

With self-hosted fonts you have ultimate control over exactly how you load your fonts, allowing you to serve custom subsets, define `font-display` settings, and specify how long the browser should cache font files for.

#### Reliability

Third-party services can suffer slowdowns, outages, or [shut down altogether](https://web.archive.org/web/20180617081657/http://blog.fontdeck.com/post/133794978966/why-fontdeck-is-retiring). When self-hosting your fonts, as long as your website is up, your fonts will be available.

### Conclusion

Each of these steps can have a benefit on its own, but used together can lead to big improvements. If you decide to implement some of the steps covered in this article, try using a tool like [Lighthouse](https://developers.google.com/web/tools/lighthouse) or [Web Page Test](https://www.webpagetest.org/) before and after you make changes, to see the effect of each individual change.

In part two, we’ll cover some more advanced techniques including JavaScript font loading strategies and variable fonts. We’ll also see the importance of choosing the right fallback fonts and introduce a new acronym — FOFT, the Flash Of Faux Text.

</details>

## [The Font Loading Checklist](https://www.zachleat.com/web/font-checklist/)

## [A Comprehensive Guide to Font Loading Strategies](https://www.zachleat.com/web/comprehensive-webfonts/)
